Rework roman numerals files (#2378)
exercism/problem-specifications: exercises/roman-numerals/introduction.md

# Description

Today, most of the world use Arabic numbers.
But if you go back two thousand years, a large proportion of Europe were using Roman numerals instead.

> Roman numerals used letters from the Latin alphabet (I, V, X, L, C, D, M) to represent numbers, and rather than having digits of 0 to 10 like modern Arabic numbers, they had numerals representing numbers starting with 1 and 5.

Author: ```suggestion
Roman numerals used letters from the Latin alphabet (I, V, X, L, C, D, M) to represent numbers. 
Rather than having digits of 0 to 10, they had numerals representing numbers starting with 1 and 5.
```

| I | V | X  | L  |  C  |  D  |  M   |
|---|---|----|----|-----|-----|------|
| 1 | 5 | 10 | 50 | 100 | 500 | 1000 |

To read Roman numerals you need to know a few basic rules.

- We read from left-to-right.

> - When a letter is repeated multiple times (e.g. `XX`), they get added: `XX(20) = X(10) + X(10)`

Author: ```suggestion
- When a letter is repeated multiple times (e.g. `XX`), they get added together: `XX(20) = X(10) + X(10)`
```

# Description

Today, most of the world use Arabic numbers.
But if you go back two thousand years, a large proportion of Europe were using Roman numerals instead.

Roman numerals used letters from the Latin alphabet (I, V, X, L, C, D, M) to represent numbers. 
Rather than having digits of 0 to 10, they had numerals representing numbers starting with 1 and 5.

| I | V | X  | L  |  C  |  D  |  M   |
|---|---|----|----|-----|-----|------|
| 1 | 5 | 10 | 50 | 100 | 500 | 1000 |

To read Roman numerals you need to know a few basic rules.

- We read from left-to-right.
- When a letter is repeated multiple times (e.g. `XX`), they get added together: `XX(20) = X(10) + X(10)`
- The same letter cannot be used more than three times in succession (e.g. `IIII` is invalid - instead you would write `IV`).
- When a larger letter precedes a smaller letter (e.g. `VI`), letters are added together: `VI(6) = (5) + I(1)`
- When a smaller letter precedes a larger letter (e.g. `IV`), the first letter is subtracted from the second: `IV(4) = V(5) - I(1)`

> - When subtracing, we cannot have more than one number being subtracted (e.g. `IIV` is invalid) and we can only subtract the nearest two letters (e.g. `IV` and `IX` are valid, but `IL` is not)

Author: I don't want to say say "power of 10" as I think that's too complex. I think referring to the letter is clearer, but this still feels clumsy.

Reviewer: It's also not a perfect description as `VX` is not valid, but fits "we can only subtract the nearest two letters". Maybe being more explicit would be best:
```
- A single "one" letter (`I`, `X` or `C`) may precede a larger "five" (`V`, `L` or `D` respectively) or "ten" letter (`X`, 'C' or `M` respectively) to subtract from it
```

- Use a single letter if possible, (e.g. `VV` is invalid - use `X` instead).

> To look at a complete example, in Roman numerals 1996 is MCMXCVI:

Author: ```suggestion
Let's look at a concrete example.
In Roman numerals 1996 is MCMXCVI:
```

# Description

> Today, most of the world use Arabic numerals.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Today, most of the world uses Arabic numerals.
```

Author: I think it's use because numerals is plural, rather than being a singular proper noun.

Reviewer 3: The grammatical number of 'numerals' has nothing to do with it. Rather, it is only the grammatical number of 'most of the world' that matters. That is the subject of the sentence after all. The 'Arabic numerals' are the subject.

Author: FWIW, from Googling, apparently people disagree on this. US tend to treat it as singular, UK as plural. Which is why I probably see it that way being British :)

Reviewer 3: Yeah, I can get into it both ways.

The proportion however is definitely singular.

The UK/US division is mostly artificial, exaggerated by computers. Many variations are current on both sides of the pond.

Reviewer 2: “Many cultures across the world today use Arabic numerals” might sidestep the issue.

> But if you go back two thousand years, a large proportion of Europe were using Roman numerals instead.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
But if you go back two thousand years, a large proportion of Europe was using Roman numerals.
```

Author: I also feel like this is were as I'm talking about the people using the numerals, who are plural.

Reviewer 3: Is it one large proportion, or several large proportion?

> Roman numerals used letters from the Latin alphabet (I, V, X, L, C, D, M) to represent numbers.

Author: ```suggestion
Roman numerals used letters from the Latin alphabet (`I`, `V`, `X`, `L`, `C`, `D`, `M`) to represent numbers.
```

> Roman numerals used letters from the Latin alphabet (I, V, X, L, C, D, M) to represent numbers. 

Author: ```suggestion
Roman numerals used letters from the Latin alphabet (I, V, X, L, C, D, M) to represent numbers.
```

> Rather than having digits of 0 to 10, they had numerals representing numbers starting with 1 and 5.

Author: ```suggestion
Rather than having digits of 0 to 9, they had numerals representing numbers starting with 1 and 5.
```

| I | V | X  | L  |  C  |  D  |  M   |
|---|---|----|----|-----|-----|------|
| 1 | 5 | 10 | 50 | 100 | 500 | 1000 |

To read Roman numerals you need to know a few basic rules.

- We read from left-to-right.
- When a letter is repeated multiple times (e.g. `XX`), they get added together: `XX(20) = X(10) + X(10)`
- The same letter cannot be used more than three times in succession (e.g. `IIII` is invalid - instead you would write `IV`).

> - When a larger letter precedes a smaller letter (e.g. `VI`), letters are added together: `VI(6) = (5) + I(1)`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- When a larger letter precedes a smaller letter (e.g. `VI`), letters are added together: `VI(6) = V(5) + I(1)`
```

- When a smaller letter precedes a larger letter (e.g. `IV`), the first letter is subtracted from the second: `IV(4) = V(5) - I(1)`

> - When subtracting, we cannot have more than one number being subtracted (e.g. `IIV` is invalid) and we can only subtract the nearest two letters (e.g. `IV` and `IX` are valid, but `IL` is not)

Author: ```suggestion
- When subtracting, only a single "one" letter (`I`, `X` or `C`) may precede the nearest larger "five" (`V`, `L` or `D`) or "ten" letter (`X`, `C` or `M`).
  Therefore, only the follow combinations are valid: `IV`, `IX`, `XL`, `XC`, `CD` and `CM`. ```

Reviewer 2: follow should be following in the proposed edit

> - Use a single letter if possible, (e.g. `VV` is invalid - use `X` instead).

Reviewer 3: Note that these rules, as written, mix the writing/converting-to and reading/converting-from perspectives. Some rules are irrelevant when reading, and some rules necessary for writing are missing (e.g. mandatory order by decreasing letter value).

---

There are several useful perspectives, but in one prominent in my head right now

- rules 1 and 3 go together (= + < = &le;),
- rules 2 and 6 go together (minimize number of letters used / length of numeral),
- rule 2+6 provides motivation for subtraction, and
- strictly speaking rule 5 is already covered by rule 4. Well, morally anyway.

Author: > (e.g. mandatory order by decreasing letter value).

Is this not the same as "reading left to right", but that needs to be more specified?

----

> There are several useful perspectives, but in one prominent in my head right now

In terms of practically solving this exercise, are there any of these rules that can be left out, or any that need to be added? These were the ones that seemed to be covered during the solutions we looked at in the Deep Dive video.

Reviewer 3: > Is this not the same as "reading left to right", but that needs to be more specified?

The rules as they are now are unclear on XXC. They rule out that it means 80, but seem to allow it to mean 10 + 90 = 100.

Reading order is irrelevant: XLVII can just as well be read as I + I + V + L + -X. But if you specify reading order you can use the words 'before' and 'after' instead of only 'to the left of' and 'to the right of' (which already suffice). Without a specified reading order 'before' and 'after' are meaningless.

( Isn't it weird to speak of reading when the exercise is about writing only? )

One rule that works:

> Ciphers (I V X L C D M) with lesser values are only ever allowed to the right of ciphers with greater values, with a few exceptions:
> - I directly next to V or X,
> - X directly next to L or C, and
> - C directly next to D or M.

This one disallows XXC: the leftmost X is to the left of C, but not directly next to it.

Another one that works:

> Blahblahs\* must be ordered by decreasing value from left to right.

\* Blahblahs could be { I, V, X, L, C, D, M, IV, IX, XL, XC, CD, CM } (i.e. ciphers + subtractions), or what one might call the Roman pseudo-digits: the aforementioned plus the likes of III, LXX, etc. Either works.

---

> In terms of practically solving this exercise, are there any of these rules that can be left out, or any that need to be added? These were the ones that seemed to be covered during the solutions we looked at in the Deep Dive video.

The perspectives I was thinking of are

```
XCVIII = -X + C + V + I + I + I  ciphers
XCVIII = XC + V + I + I + I      no good name found yet
XCVIII = XC + VIII               pseudo-digits, very (too?) easy to work with
```

'Practically solving this exercise' is easiest when given rules in terms of pseudo-digits. These rules are also easy to state, do not include subtraction shenanigans, but do include [this table](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Roman_numerals#Standard_form).

I'll post this now and go through the rules again to properly answer your question.

Reviewer 3: > In terms of practically solving this exercise, are there any of these rules that can be left out, or any that need to be added? These were the ones that seemed to be covered during the solutions we looked at in the Deep Dive video.

Missing rule: only I, X, C are allowed to be subtracted.

Missing rule: something to rule out IXX.

Ambiguity: is IXC allowed?

Reviewer 3: I _think_ this writing explanation is complete:

<details><summary>draft</summary>
To write a Roman numeral we use the following Latin letters, each of which has a value:

| M    | D   | C   | L  | X  | V | I |
| ---- | --- | --- | -- | -- | - | - |
| 1000 | 500 | 100 | 50 | 10 | 5 | 1 |

A Roman numeral is a sequence of these letters, and its value is the sum of the values of its letters.
Example: XVIII has the value 10 + 5 + 1 + 1 + 1 = 18.

Letter order matters.
Letters with greater values must all occur to the left of letters with lesser values.
For example, XMCII is illegal because the value of X (10) is less than the value of C (100).
MCXII on the other hand is legal, and means 1112.

There are six exceptions to the above rule: it is allowed to write

- I immediately to the left of a V or an X,
- X immediately to the left of an L or a C, and
- C immediately to the left of a D or an M.

In these cases the value of this I, X or C is not added, but subtracted.
Example: while CXV means 115, XCV means -10 + 100 + 5 = 95.
Another example: XXC is illegal, because the left X is not directly adjacent to the C.
One more example: CMM is illegal, because the C is not directly adjacent to the second M.

Finally, Roman numerals are always written with the minimum number of letters possible.
That is, instead of VV we write X, and instead of CCCC we write CD.
</details>

Let's look at a concrete example.
In Roman numerals 1996 is MCMXCVI:

```text
 1000 => M
  900 => CM
   90 => XC
+   6 => VI
----- => -----
 1996 => MCMXCVI

> ```

Author: I've removed anything about converting roman numerals to arabic numbers, as I think it complicates the whole thing.

# Description

The Romans were a clever bunch.
They conquered most of Europe and ruled it for hundreds of years.
They invented concrete and straight roads and even central heating.

> But one thing they never discovered though was the number zero.

Reviewer 2: Misleading. Romans had zero (`nulla`) but they didn’t need to represent it with a numeral. The numerals aren’t used for arithmetic but to represent a number. So X is sufficient to represent ten without having to do I(zero symbol). Zero the number is just `nulla` and why add a whole another symbol for a special case?

Author: Interesting. I'm just leaving this in from the old description.md but I sort of feel that maybe this whole section could go tbh. I'm not big on the "yay conquering everyone" vibe either, and I already got rid of the bikini bit.

Reviewer 2: Yup, I was a Classics minor in college so I also feel obligated to point out the Greeks had both concrete and central heating for centuries before the Romans. To give credit where it's due, the Romans took both to a whole new level of course.

Reviewer 4: > I'm just leaving this in from the old description.md but I sort of feel that maybe this whole section could go tbh. 

Totally agree! I don't think it adds much.

> Their numbering system, known today as "Roman Numerals" uses letters - I, V, X, L, C, D, M.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Their numbering system, known today as "Roman numerals" uses letters - I, V, X, L, C, D, M.
```

Missed this one.

| I | V | X  | L  |  C  |  D  |  M   |
|---|---|----|----|-----|-----|------|
| 1 | 5 | 10 | 50 | 100 | 500 | 1000 |

> There are four basic rules for Roman Numerals:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are four basic rules for Roman numerals:
```

> - When a larger letter precedes a smaller letter, the letters are added together. For example: in `VI`, `V` (5) is larger than `I` (1), so we add them together to get 6.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- When a larger letter precedes a smaller letter, the letters are added together.
For example: in `VI`, `V` (5) is larger than `I` (1), so we add them together to get 6.
```

One line per sentence or would this mess up the formatting?

Reviewer 3: It will not mess up formatting. Indentation is allowed:

```suggestion
- When a larger letter precedes a smaller letter, the letters are added together.
  For example: in `VI`, `V` (5) is larger than `I` (1), so we add them together to get 6.
```

- When a smaller letter precedes a larger letter, the letters are subtracted. For example: in `IV`, `I` (1) is smaller than `V` (5), so we subtract 1 from 5 to get 4.

> - When a letter is repeated multiple times, they get added. For example: with `XX` we add `X` (10) to `X` (10), to get 20.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- When a letter is repeated multiple times, they get added. For example: with `XX` we add `X` (10) to `X` (10) to get 20.
```

- The same letter cannot be used more than three times in succession.

> 

Reviewer 3: There is a missing rule: only the greatest lesser power-of-10 digit is allowed in subtractive position. That is: only IV, IX, XL, XC, CD, CM are allowed. (In Renaissance standard Roman numerals anyway.)

Author: > only the greatest lesser power-of-10 digit is allowed in subtractive position

Can you reword that so my brain can make sense of it pls? 😁

Reviewer 3: I struggled to find a _nice_ summary, and still haven't found any. Possibly the most human-compatible way is to essentially list all possibilities:

> In subtractive position are allowed only:
> 
> - I before V, X
> - X before L, C
> - C before D, M
> 
> V, L, D are never allowed in subtractive position, nor are I, X when the following digit is 'too great', as in IC.

Author: So you can go only two steps back?

Reviewer 5: > So you can go only two steps back?

I'd rather say you can "go back" to the previous power of 10 (from C or L to X, from X or V to I).

It is also normal to use a single letter if possible, so for example, you'd choose `X` (10) rather than `VV` (5 + 5).

## Examples

In Roman numerals 1990 is MCMXC:

```text
 1000 => M
  900 => CM
+  90 => XC
----- => -----
 1990 => MCMXC
```

MCMLXXVIII is 1978:

```text
 M          => 1000
  CM        =>  900 (1000 - 100)

> +   LXXVIII =>   78 (50 + 10 + 10 + 5 + 1 + 1 + 1)

Author: ```suggestion
    LXX     =>   70 (50 + 10 + 10)
+      VIII =>    8 (5 + 1 + 1 + 1)
```

----------- => ----

>  MCMLXXVIII => 1978

Author: @MatthijsBlom @siebenschlaefer Why does this get read as "M-CM" rather than "MC-M"?

Reviewer 3: Because C < M, an M cannot follow a C. But they can come together as CM.

It might help to think of CM as a single digit.

# Description

> Today, most people in the world use Arabic numbers.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Today, most people in the world use Arabic numerals.
```

> Today, most people in the world use Arabic numbers.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Today, most people in the world use Arabic numerals (0–9).
```
This is the first time that Arabic numerals are mentioned.

But if you travelled back two thousand years, you'd find that most Europeans were using Roman numerals instead.

To write a Roman numeral we use the following Latin letters, each of which has a value:

| M    | D   | C   | L  | X  | V | I |
|------|-----|-----|----|----|---|---|
| 1000 | 500 | 100 | 50 | 10 | 5 | 1 |

A Roman numeral is a sequence of these letters, and its value is the sum of the letters' values.

> For example, `XVIII` has the value 18 (`10 + 5 + 1 + 1 + 1 = 18`).
> 
> There's one rule that makes things tricker though, and that's that **the same letter cannot be used more than three times in succession**.

Reviewer 3: I expect the subtraction construct to be easier to contextualize when it is already known that letters are generally ordered in order of decreasing value, so I'd put the note about order between these paragraphs.

As of yet I have no better idea than

```suggestion
For example, `XVIII` has the value 18 (`10 + 5 + 1 + 1 + 1 = 18`).

Order matters in Roman numerals.
Letters (and the special compounds given below) must be ordered by decreasing value from left to right.

There's one rule that makes things trickier though, and that's that **the same letter cannot be used more than three times in succession**.
```

> For example, `XVIII` has the value 18 (`10 + 5 + 1 + 1 + 1 = 18`).
> 
> There's one rule that makes things tricker though, and that's that **the same letter cannot be used more than three times in succession**.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For example, `XVIII` has the value 18 (`10 + 5 + 1 + 1 + 1 = 18`).

There's one rule that makes things trickier though, and that's that **the same letter cannot be used more than three times in succession**.
```

> That means that we can't express numbers such as 4 using the seamingly natural method of `IIII`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
That means that we can't express numbers such as 4 using the seemingly natural method of `IIII`.
```

> That means that we can't express numbers such as 4 using the seamingly natural method of `IIII`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
That means that we can't express numbers such as 4 with the seemingly natural `IIII`.
```

't Is not a method.

Instead, for those numbers, we use a subtraction method between two letters.
So we think of `4` not as `1 + 1 + 1 + 1` but instead as `5 - 1`.
And slightly confusingly to our modern thinking, we write the smaller number first.

> This applies in the following cases: 4 (`IV`), 9 (`IX`), 40 (`XL`), 90 (`XC`), 400 (`CD`) or 900 (`CM`).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This applies only in the following cases: 4 (`IV`), 9 (`IX`), 40 (`XL`), 90 (`XC`), 400 (`CD`) or 900 (`CM`).
```
Just to be extra safe/clear.

> This applies in the following cases: 4 (`IV`), 9 (`IX`), 40 (`XL`), 90 (`XC`), 400 (`CD`) or 900 (`CM`).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This applies in the following cases: 4 (`IV`), 9 (`IX`), 40 (`XL`), 90 (`XC`), 400 (`CD`) and 900 (`CM`).
```

> 

Reviewer 3: These rules do not rule out numerals like VVV. However, failing tests probably make amply clear what the intent is, so I do not foresee problems here.

# Description

Today, most of the world use Arabic numbers.
But if you go back two thousand years, a large proportion of Europe were using Roman numerals instead.

Roman numerals used letters from the Latin alphabet (I, V, X, L, C, D, M) to represent numbers, and rather than having digits of 0 to 10 like modern Arabic numbers, they had numerals representing numbers starting with 1 and 5.

| I | V | X  | L  |  C  |  D  |  M   |
|---|---|----|----|-----|-----|------|
| 1 | 5 | 10 | 50 | 100 | 500 | 1000 |

To read Roman numerals you need to know a few basic rules.

- We read from left-to-right.
- When a letter is repeated multiple times (e.g. `XX`), they get added: `XX(20) = X(10) + X(10)`
- The same letter cannot be used more than three times in succession (e.g. `IIII` is invalid - instead you would write `IV`).
- When a larger letter precedes a smaller letter (e.g. `VI`), letters are added together: `VI(6) = (5) + I(1)`
- When a smaller letter precedes a larger letter (e.g. `IV`), the first letter is subtracted from the second: `IV(4) = V(5) - I(1)`

> - When subtracing, we cannot have more than one number being subtracted (e.g. `IIV` is invalid) and we can only subtract the nearest two letters (e.g. `IV` and `IX` are valid, but `IL` is not)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- When subtracting, we cannot have more than one number being subtracted (e.g. `IIV` is invalid) and we can only subtract the nearest two letters (e.g. `IV` and `IX` are valid, but `IL` is not)
```
